Seok Jin Hong, Jong-Uk Hou, Moon Jae Chung, Sung Hun Kang, Bo-Seok Shim, Seung-Lee Lee, Da Hae Park, Anna Choi, Jae Yeon Oh, Kyong Joo Lee, Eun Shin, Eunae Cho, Se Woo Park,
Convolutional neural network model for automatic recognition and classification of pancreatic cancer cell based on analysis of lipid droplet on unlabeled sample by 3D optical diffraction tomography,
Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine,
Volume 246,
2024,
108041,
ISSN 0169-2607,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmpb.2024.108041.
(https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0169260724000373)
Abstract: Introduction
Pancreatic cancer cells generally accumulate large numbers of lipid droplets (LDs), which regulate lipid storage. To promote rapid diagnosis, an automatic pancreatic cancer cell recognition system based on a deep convolutional neural network was proposed in this study using quantitative images of LDs from stain-free cytologic samples by optical diffraction tomography.
Methods
We retrieved 3D refractive index tomograms and reconstructed 37 optical images of one cell. From the four cell lines, the obtained fields were separated into training and test datasets with 10,397 and 3,478 images, respectively. Furthermore, we adopted several machine learning techniques based on a single image-based prediction model to improve the performance of the computer-aided diagnostic system.
Results
Pancreatic cancer cells had a significantly lower total cell volume and dry mass than did normal pancreatic cells and were accompanied by greater numbers of lipid droplets (LDs). When evaluating multitask learning techniques utilizing the EfficientNet-b3 model through confusion matrices, the overall 2-category accuracy for cancer classification reached 96.7 %. Simultaneously, the overall 4-category accuracy for individual cell line classification achieved a high accuracy of 96.2 %. Furthermore, when we added the core techniques one by one, the overall performance of the proposed technique significantly improved, reaching an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.997 and an accuracy of 97.06 %. Finally, the AUC reached 0.998 through the ablation study with the score fusion technique.
Discussion
Our novel training strategy has significant potential for automating and promoting rapid recognition of pancreatic cancer cells. In the near future, deep learning-embedded medical devices will substitute laborious manual cytopathologic examinations for sustainable economic potential.
Keywords: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma; Holotomography; Deep learning; Lipid metabolism; Lipid droplet
